Electoral Behavior and Party Competition: Continuity and Change in
Western Europe[2]  

================

# Course description

Elections in Europe have become increasingly unpredictable in the last
decades. In Germany, for example, the government negotiations escalated
from one month in 2013 to almost six months after the entry of the
radical party AfD in the *Bundestag* in 2017. In other European
countries, such as Spain or the Netherlands, the number of parliamentary
parties has doubled in the last twenty years, while the Italian party
system has arguably collapsed twice in the same period. How has this
situation come about? What are its consequences? These changes are not
random but driven by societal transformations and the strategies of
political actors, such as social movements and new challenger parties.
In addition, they have not affected all of Europe equally but depend on
factors that vary across countries and over time. This seminar will
review the different ‘transformation waves’ that have shaped Western
European party systems from the 1960s until now. It will then try to
make sense of these changes by exploring the most relevant (electoral)
demand-side and supply-side explanations discussed in the literature.
The goal is to provide students with the conceptual and empirical tools
to analyze the behaviour of voters and parties by following the
evolution of Western European party systems from a comparative
perspective.

# Course organization

The course consists of a weekly seminar that will run during the Spring
term of 2023 (February 22nd - May 31st). The substantive focus of the
seminars is organized in four blocks. The first block will introduce
students to the main concepts in the study of parties and party systems
and review the main theories of party system formation. The second block
will review the different transformational waves that have affected
Western European party systems from the 1960s until now. The third block
will delve into the literature on political behaviour and party
competition to focus on the mechanisms behind party system stability and
change. The final block will focus on the measurement of party system
change and its normative implications.

# Learning outcomes

By the end of this course, students will be able to:

-   **(Knowledge)** Identify the main theoretical approaches to the
    study of party system formation and change, integrate supply and
    demand-side explanations for the study of electoral outcomes, and
    use the most relevant indicators to assess electoral change.

-   **(Competence)** Critically reflect on the different theories and
    methods reviewed during the course to assess the predictive validity
    of different approaches in time and space.

-   **(Research skills)** Read scientific articles with a critical
    perspective, develop their own hypotheses and connect them with the
    relevant literature, and design feasible ways to test them.

-   **(Communication)** Communicate complex concepts effectively to a
    broad audience, alone or in collaboration with colleagues.

# Teaching policy

This course is designed as a seminar, not a lecture. It aims to foster
and refine critical thinking by providing a collaborative learning
environment. The lecturer will give a broad overview of the subject
matter in each lesson to guide the discussion, which the students will
drive. Therefore, students are expected to study the mandatory readings
before class. Slides are not intended to replace given texts and will
only be distributed after each session.

# Evaluation

## Mandatory requirements (4 credits)

To receive the credits, students are expected to fulfil the following
criteria:

### 1. Attend all the sessions.

Attendance is mandatory. Students can miss a maximum of two sessions.
Missing more sessions without a justified certificate of absence implies
failing the course.

### 2. Study the mandatory readings before each session.

*Studying = reading + critical thinking*. Students can find the texts in
the materials folder in OLAT.

### 3. Write two response papers.

Students must select two sessions and write a short response paper
(500-700 words) to the mandatory readings of the session.

A good response paper should:

-   *Start with a short summary of the paper*. It should not be a
    summary of the content but of the main thesis and findings of the
    paper.

-   *Identify the contribution.* It should state clearly what bigger
    problem or question the author is contributing to addressing.

-   *Evaluate the argument from a critical perspective.* I should
    identify the main contributions and limitations of the paper and
    proposes ways in which these limitations should be addressed either
    by the author or in future research.

Some of the readings may be less suited to this structure, for example,
book chapters or literature reviews. In these cases, the students are
encouraged to develop different critical evaluations of the text, such
as developing some of the open questions or hypotheses laid out in the
text.

The suggested readings are not mandatory. However, the students will
benefit from linking them to the main text in their response papers.

The **submission rules** are:

-   Students must upload their response papers to the *Response papers*
    folder in OLAT.

-   The deadline for submitting the response paper is the **Sunday
    before the corresponding session at noon (12:00)**.

-   Students cannot send papers for *session 1* and *session 14*, which
    are free-readings sessions.

-   One of the response papers must be submitted for a session before
    the **spring break (10-16th April)** and one afterwards.

-   The response papers cannot be sent for the same session as the
    student’s presentation.

-   The file must be in Word. The title should include the session’s
    number followed by the student’s surname in capital letters and the
    response paper number (either 1 or 2). For example:
    *session04_CANALEJO_1*

### 4. Conduct one presentation.

Presentations can be done alone or in groups of two or three students,
depending on the number of students taking the course. The schedule will
be decided upon the **introductory session**.

Presenters must critically re-examine the mandatory readings of the
session to locate a troubling or unsatisfactory element, then propose a
solution including a theoretical motivation and a feasible research
design. A discussion of the proposal will follow the presentation.
Presenters must upload the slides of the presentation **at least 24
hours before the presentation** to the *Presentations* folder in OLAT to
allow the discussant to prepare.

For more information, see the section **X**. The use of this
presentation to develop an independent research project is encouraged
(e.g. future seminar papers or thesis).

### 5. Serve as discussant of one presentation.

Each presentation will be assigned a discussant. The discussant must
study the research proposal of the presenters in advance and provide
feedback after the presentation. The feedback must be constructive. It
should be directed to clarify the proposal’s main concepts and propose
ways to improve the design.

### 6. Participate actively in class.

Active engagement involves intervening during the discussion with
original ideas and open questions and linking the content of the
readings to the debate. Students are also encouraged to bring debates
that exceed the content of the session, but it is linked to the general
topic of the course.

## Grading policy

-   40% of the grade is determined by the response papers.

-   40% of the grade is determined by the presentation.

-   20% of the grade is jointly determined by the quality and quantity
    of the participation in class and the discussion of the
    presentation.

## Seminar paper (6 credits)

Students can choose to write a seminar paper to obtain six extra
credits. The seminar paper must have between 5500 and 6500 words.
Students can choose if they want to write an empirical or a theoretical
paper. The topic should be agreed upon between the instructor and the
student. To this end, students are asked to write a paper outline of 1-2
pages consisting of the following elements:

-   Introduction of the topic

-   Research question

-   Academic and societal relevance

-   Theories (and hypotheses, if applicable)

-   Approach and structure of the paper (including a tentative empirical
    design, if applicable)

The deadline for the submission of the paper outline is **May 1st
2023**.

The deadline for the submission of the seminar paper is **September 1st
2023**.

Please refer to “The (Pro-)Seminar Paper” section of the guidelines for
academic research provided by the Department of Political Science for
more details.

# Office hours

Student meetings can be held during the instructor’s **weekly office
hours**, scheduled each **Tuesday** (starting from February 21st until
June 6th inclusive) **between 13.30 and 15.30**. If any student wants to
make use of the office hours, she must book a time slot via e-mail:
<alvaro.canalejo@unilu.ch>. The office is in **room 3.A12**.

Any student can send an e-mail during office hours without scheduling a
meeting for quick questions.

# Guidelines for the presentation

A good presentation should include the following:

1.  An outline of the presentation.

2.  A brief summary of the readings, including their main argument,
    methodology (if applicable) and contribution. It should focus on
    those aspects of the text that the student(s) aim to analyze later.
    It should never be a full summary of the content.

3.  A critique of the argument or the research design.

Some examples are an inconsistent logic, flawed conceptualizations
(e.g., concepts that do not travel well across contexts), limited
external validity (e.g., results that do not apply in other contexts),
limited internal validity (e.g., poorly identified causal relationship,
for example, due to omitted variables), limited relevance, etc.

4.  Propose a feasible research design to overcome these limitations or
    build upon them.

    -   Matching the previous examples, some examples are a better-built
        argument that leads to different implications, an original
        conceptualization that performs better, outlining a research
        design that would prove the results valid in a different or
        wider setting, or a research design that controlled for
        potential confounders.

The presentation is evaluated based on its clarity, the understanding of
the original readings’ concepts, the critical evaluation’s depth, the
congruency between the critique and the research proposal’s aim to solve
it, the argumentation and the ability to discuss the discussant’s
points. For more guidelines, see the guidelines on [Academic Research
and Writing of the Department of Political
Science.](https://www.unilu.ch/fileadmin/fakultaeten/ksf/institute/polsem/Dok/Studium/2016-Jan_Guidelines_Booklet_engl.pdf)

# Course schedule

## Introductory session

**22.02.2023.** ***Session 01. Introduction***

No readings.

## Block I. Introduction to parties and party systems

**01.03.2023.** ***Session 02. Mapping the terrain: parties, electoral
competition and party systems***

-   Mandatory readings:

Mair, Peter (1997). \`\`Party systems and structures of competition’’.
In: .

-   Suggested readings:

Mair, Peter and Cas Mudde (1998). \`\`The party family and its study’’.
In: 1.1, pp. 211–229.

Sartori, Giovanni (1976). . ECPR press.

**08.03.2023.** ***Session 03. The formation of party systems I: the
institutional approach***

-   Mandatory readings:

Benoit, Kenneth (2006). \`\`Duverger’s law and the study of electoral
systems’’. In: 4, pp. 69–83.

Heath, Oliver and Adam Ziegfeld (2022). \`\`Why So Little Strategic
Voting in India?’’ In: 116.4, pp. 1523–1529.

-   Suggested readings:

Riker, William H (1982). \`\`The two–party system and Duverger’s law: An
essay on the history of political science’’. In: 76.4, pp. 753–766.

**15.03.2023.** ***Session 04. The formation of party systems II: the
sociological approach***

-   Mandatory readings:

Lipset, Seymour Martin and Stein Rokkan (1967). \`\`Cleavage structures,
party systems, and voter alignments: an introduction’’. In: . Free
Press.

-   Suggested readings:

Boix, Carles (2007). \`\`The emergence of parties and party systems’’.
In: .

## Block II. Party system change in WE

**22.03.2023.** ***Session 05. Party system change in WE I: Green
parties and the silent revolution***

*Exceptionally, this session will take place the 22nd of March from
13:30 to 15:15 in the room 3.A05.*

-   Mandatory readings:

Inglehart, Ronald (1971). \`\`The silent revolution: Changing values and
political styles in advanced industrial society’’. In: 65.4,
pp. 991-1017.

Müller–Rommel, Ferdinand (1998). \`\`Explaining the electoral success of
green parties: A cross–national analysis’’. In: 7.4, pp. 145–154.

-   Suggested readings:

Müller–Rommel, Ferdinand (2019). . Routledge.

**22.03.2023.** ***Session 06. Party system change in WE II: New far
right parties and the silent counter-revolution***

*Exceptionally, this session will take place the 22nd of March from
15:15 to 17:00 in the room 3.A05.*

-   Mandatory readings:

Ignazi, Piero (1992). \`\`The silent counter–revolution’’. In: 22.1,
pp. 3–34.

Mudde, Cas (2014). \`\`Fighting the system? Populist radical right
parties and party system change’’. In: 20.2, pp. 217–226.

-   Suggested readings:

Betz, Hans–George (1993). \`\`The new politics of resentment: radical
right–wing populist parties in Western Europe’’. In: , pp. 413–427.

**05.04.2023.** ***Session 07. Party system change III: Economic voting
after the Great Recession***

-   Mandatory readings:

Fiorina, Morris P (1978). \`\`Economic retrospective voting in American
national elections: A micro–analysis’’. In: , pp. 426–443.

Kriesi, Hanspeter and Swen Hutter (2019). \`\`Economic and political
crises–the context of critical elections’’. In: , p. 33.

-   Suggested readings:

Hutter, Swen, Hanspeter Kriesi, and Guillem Vidal (2018). \`\`Old versus
new politics: The political spaces in Southern Europe in times of
crises’’. In: 24.1, pp. 10–22.

## Block III. Demand-side and supply-side explanations

**19.04.2023.** ***Session 08. Demand-side changes I: the emergence of a
cultural cleavage ***

-   Mandatory readings:

Kriesi, Hanspeter, Edgar Grande, Romain Lachat, Martin Dolezal, Simon
Bornschier, and Timotheos Frey (2006). \`\`Globalization and the
transformation of the national political space: Six European countries
compared’’. In: 45.6, pp. 921–956.

Zollinger, Delia (2022). \`\`Cleavage Identities in Votersâ€™ Own Words:
Harnessing Open-Ended Survey Responses’’. In: , pp. 1–48.

-   Suggested readings:

Bornschier, Simon (2010). \`\`The new cultural divide and the
two–dimensional political space in Western Europe’’. In: 33.3,
pp. 419–444.

Hooghe, Liesbet and Gary Marks (2018). \`\`Cleavage theory meets
Europeâ€™s crises: Lipset, Rokkan, and the transnational cleavage’’. In:
25.1, pp. 109–135.

**26.04.2023.** ***Session 09. Demand-side changes II: old cleavages in
the XXIst century***

-   Mandatory readings:

Goldberg, Andreas C (2020). \`\`The evolution of cleavage voting in four
Western countries: Structural, behavioural or political dealignment?’’
In: 59.1, pp. 68–90.

Oesch, Daniel (2008). \`\`Explaining workers’ support for right–wing
populist parties in Western Europe: Evidence from Austria, Belgium,
France, Norway, and Switzerland’’. In: 29.3, pp. 349–373.

-   Suggested readings:

Oesch, Daniel and Line Rennwald (2018). \`\`Electoral competition in
Europe’s new tripolar political space: Class voting for the left,
centre–right and radical right’’. In: 57.4, pp. 783–807. ISSN:
0304-4130.

**03.05.2023.** ***Session 10. Supply-side changes I: the weakening of
traditional party ties***

-   Mandatory readings:

Mair, Peter (2013). . Verso Books.

Only chapters 1 and 3 are mandatory.

-   Suggested readings:

Dalton, Russell J and Martin P Wattenberg (2002). . Oxford University
Press on Demand.

Spoon, Jae–Jae and Heike Klüver (2019). \`\`Party convergence and vote
switching: Explaining mainstream party decline across Europe’’. In: .

**10.05.2023.** ***Session 11. Supply-side changes II: challenger
parties and the issue entrepreneurship model***

-   Mandatory readings:

Carmines, Edward G and James A Stimson (1986). \`\`On the structure and
sequence of issue evolution’’. In: 80.3, pp. 901–920.

Hobolt, Sara B and Catherine E De Vries (2012). \`\`When dimensions
collide: The electoral success of issue entrepreneurs’’. In: 13.2,
pp. 246–268.

-   Suggested readings:

Vries, Catherine E de and Sara Hobolt (2020). . Princeton University
Press.

## Block IV. Implications and empirical applications

**17.05.2023.** ***Session 12. Assessing party system change: the
‘freezing hypothesis’ debate***

-   Mandatory readings:

Chiaramonte, Alessandro and Vincenzo Emanuele (2017). \`\`Party system
volatility, regeneration and de–institutionalization in Western Europe
(1945–2015)’’. In: 23.4, pp. 376–388.

Mair, Peter (1993). \`\`Myths of electoral change and the survival of
traditional parties: The 1992 Stein Rokkan Lecture’’. In: 24.2,
pp. 121–133.

-   Suggested readings:

Bartolini, Stefano and Peter Mair (1990). . Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

**24.05.2023.** ***Session 13. The consequences of party system
change***

-   Mandatory readings:

Bischof, Daniel and Markus Wagner (2019). \`\`Do Voters Polarize When
Radical Parties Enter Parliament?’’ In: .

Valentim, Vicente and Elias Dinas (2023). \`\`Does Party–System
Fragmentation Affect the Quality of Democracy?’’ In: .

-   Suggested readings:

Canalejo-Molero, Álvaro (2023). .

**31.05.2023.** ***Session 14. Empirical workshop on electoral
volatility***

No readings.

[1] Sessions 5 and 6 will take place in room 3.A05 on the wednessday
22nd of March from 13:30 to 17:00.

[2] This version of the syllabus: 07 Feb 2023
